---
layout: post
title: What good are business schools anyway?
meta: "Rather than bulldozing these chapels of capitalism, we should be taking a page out of their books by learning how to replicate their best features and improving their worst."
categories: ["blog", "medium", "opinion"]
author: "Alex Miller"
source: https://medium.com/s/story/what-good-are-business-schools-anyway-f5c399d916ef
hero_image: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1100/1*Mtnks1PYQc06eUxYCZiojQ.jpeg
date: 2018-06-22
---


Business schools are easy to hate. They are filled with students aspiring to be
cogs in the capitalist machine of corporate America shelling out hundreds of
thousands of dollars for the increasingly dubious value of having an “MBA”. It’s
no surprise that, last month, [The Guardian published an
excerpt](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/apr/27/bulldoze-the-business-school)
from a new book titled, S*hut Down the Business School: What’s Wrong with
Management Education.*The author, Martin Parker (a business school professor
himself) offers a spate of criticisms on how business schools operate and the
impact they are having on students.

In light of the general angst surrounding economic stagnation in Western
capitalist countries and the increasing concern about the value of higher
education, the criticisms in Parker’s piece are worth taking seriously. At the
same time, this book is a great excuse to consider why we even have business
schools in the first place and to understand what (if any) value they have in
21st century society.

*****

Parker’s essay includes several compelling critiques that business school
administrators should consider seriously. Among the more compelling critiques is
his calling out of “corporate social responsibility” programs as mere veneers of
do-gooderism that do nothing more than to justify a collective form of moral
licensing. (A criticism which [he is far from
alone](http://freakonomics.com/podcast/corporate-social-responsibility/) in
espousing.) His essay is also useful for highlighting the literature on “hidden
curriculum”. All institutions should consider the ways in which implicit biases
and messages are communicated through their culture, and business schools are no
exception.

But should we really bulldoze an entire institution because of its
imperfections? To answer this question and put Parker’s arguments in proper
context, it’s useful to recognize that his philosophy has its own kind of
implicit agenda that also deserves closer examination. Ultimately, his arguments
are part of a broader debate about how we organize our society. By no means does
Parker attempt to conceal his disdain for modern capitalism:

> “… the B-school … [teaches] people how to get money out of the pockets of
> ordinary people and keep it for themselves. In some senses, that’s a description
of capitalism.”

Indeed, Parker’s criticism goes beyond lamenting corporate greed; fundamentally,
Parker disagrees with the way modern society works. There is clearly a longing
for a world based on something other than capitalism: “The business school
assumes capitalism, corporations and managers as the default form of
organisation, and everything else as history, anomaly, exception, alternative”.
(How one can tell the history of modern civilization and describe the present
state of the economy without referring to capitalism as the “default” form of
organization is apparently left as an exercise for the reader.)

There is, of course, plenty of room in academia for leftist critiques of
capitalism, businesses, and, yes, even business schools. But Parker seems to
lament the fact that Marxism isn’t treated as a first-class theory in business
school curricula. This would be akin to my lamenting the fact that the ideas of
Adam Smith and Frederick Hayek aren’t treated as first-class theories that
should inform the curricula of my university’s liberal arts departments.

I do, of course, have some opinions about what is taught in the other buildings
on campus. But I do not have the temerity to suggest bulldozing those buildings
and replacing them with new schools that exclusively teach my pet philosophies.
This is not only because such a suggestion requires an inordinate amount of
certainty about the validity of my worldview, but I also realize that doing so
would not have a significant impact on the education of most students at the
university.

In a small but concrete manifestation of the market for ideas, college students
get to choose their majors. Many of the theories and worldviews that Parker
espouses are already well-represented in departments outside of the business
schools on college campuses. The fact that[ business is among the most popular
major in the United States](https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=37)
suggests that, by and large, students already consciously choose to study
business over the liberal arts. Indeed, the popularity of business schools is a
constant reminder of an uncomfortable truth for many high-minded academics: that
the number one reason most students attend college is to get a good-paying job
in the modern workforce. Schools of business are simply the most intellectually
honest places on campus about the *raison d’etre* of modern universities.

Bulldozing an entire section of campus wouldn’t mean students in those
departments disappear; it just means they end up looking elsewhere for the
closest replacement. So unless Parker’s suggestion of replacing business schools
with “Schools for Organizing” comes with a commensurate authoritarian lever that
enforces students to enroll in his new curriculum, there is no reason to expect
that tomorrow’s aspiring executives and entrepreneurs would be lining up outside
his classrooms. Instead, we would expect his entire proposal to have relatively
minor impact on corporate America as students simply migrate to other schools
and departments that better suit their interests. Indeed, Parker’s entire
suggestion smacks of ignorance about how sweeping policy proposals and the
complex choices of individuals interact in the real world. This is precisely one
of the skills that is developed by understanding the economically-informed
“market managerialism” that Parker [and
others](https://newrepublic.com/article/148368/ideology-business-school) so
swiftly dismiss as dangerous “ideology”.

So what is it about the ideology of these chapels of capitalism that critics
find to be so dangerous in the first place? What do students actually learn
inside the hallowed halls of a business school? And do they have *any* redeeming
quality?

*****

#### What do students learn at business school?

The most influential figure in the history of managerial science is [Frederick
Winslow Taylor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frederick_Winslow_Taylor), a
mechanical engineer from Philadelphia who, as a contemporary of the late Marx
and Engels, lived to see the dramatic reorganization of society around the
industrial economy. [Not an uncontroversial
figure](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/10/12/not-so-fast) — he had an
exceptionally poor opinion of the working class and a singular focus on
efficiency as a virtue — Taylor was among the first intellectuals to emphasize
the importance of analyzing and systematizing human labor. While he can
rightfully be credited with accelerating the atomization of the American worker,
the “Taylorization” of the industrial economy is also largely responsible for
the rise of American manufacturing — and with it, the American middle class —
throughout much of the 20th century.

While business school curriculum has grown to encompass both a more cerebral
conceptualization of management theory (due mostly to the influence of Peter
Drucker in the 1960s and 70s) and an economic approach to modeling human
behavior, it is still largely defined by one of the core, motivating principles
of Taylorism. At the heart of Taylor’s theory of scientific management is the
idea that there are bad ways to do things and good ways to do things. His entire
method was predicated on the idea of measuring efficiency of individual workers,
identifying the routines and methods of the most efficient workers, and
replicating these routines throughout the entire workforce.

Such atomization and oversight of individual workers has obvious downsides that
few, if any, business school professors espouse (particularly in the age of
digital surveillance). But it is a more broadly construed definition of
Taylorism — applied at the organizational and conceptual level — that is the
“dangerous” ideology being taught behind the angular, modern facades of most
business schools. Put succinctly, the goal of business schools is to recognize
that some approaches to solving organizational problems are better than other
approaches, identify which solutions apply in which circumstances, and to teach
the generalizable principles that can be learned from studying these problems in
a variety of contexts.

Of course, this is not a radical idea. But, as anyone who has spent any time
working at a business of moderate complexity knows, disorder, chaos, and
inefficiency are the natural order of human organizations. *Homo sapiens* are
stubborn creatures with rules-of-thumb, cognitive biases, and a natural state of
ignorance that prevents conglomerations of them from executing well on their
stated objectives.

And despite the proclamation by some critics that the “bankrupt ideology” of
business schools has swept America, even 100 years after Taylor published his
magnum opus, the most basic principles of scientific management have yet to have
significant impact on large sectors of the economy. In 2012, surgeon and
best-selling author Atul Gawande penned an essay about how to improve the
American healthcare system in which, without invoking its name, he advocated for
precisely the type of Taylorism that is the cornerstone of business school
curriculum ([What Big Medicine Can Learn from the Cheesecake
Factory](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/08/13/big-med)**, ***The New
Yorker***)**. Recounting a conversation that inspired his essay in [a recent
episode of Freakonomics](http://freakonomics.com/podcast/atul-gawande/), Gawande
remarked:

> I was talking to one of the managers [at a Cheesecake Factory] about how he
> would make healthcare work. And his answer was, “Here’s what I would do, but of
course you guys do this. I would look to see what the best people are doing. I
would find a way to turn that into a recipe, make sure everybody else is doing
it, and then see how far we improve and try learning again from that.” He said,
“You do that, right?” And we don’t. We don’t do that.

It is not an exaggeration to say that thousands of lives could be saved by
improving efficiency, consistency, and quality of service in healthcare. And
while the professors of Martin Parker’s ideal schools of the future might be
preoccupied with the implications of continental philosophy on the
super-structure of human society, academics and students in the really-existing
schools of management throughout the world have had a century of experience
learning how to solve this precise problem of improving service delivery in
complex organizations. Indeed, [some of the most ambitious academic initiatives
in improving human
health](https://penntoday.upenn.edu/spotlights/quest-lasting-behavior-change-two-researchers-lead-charge)
are being inspired by management research and headed by business school
professors.

What it is that our organizations are doing is certainly an important question —
and one that actually does preoccupy many of my professors and colleagues. But
conditional on a specified organizational goal, business school is where you go
to learn how to accomplish that goal. How will you finance your venture? Who do
you hire to fill key roles? How will your company’s culture affect your
organization’s performance? How do you prevent the idiosyncratic flaws of
individual decision makers from hindering performance? How can technology be
used to improve informational and communicative capacities of your organization?

These are not questions that can be answered by questioning the fundamental
premises that organize society. We can and should ask hard questions about the
effects of shareholder capitalism on society. But as many examples from
non-profit sectors and medicine demonstrate, even organizations with the best of
intentions often fail at putting those intentions into practice.

The fact of the matter is that business schools are concerned with improving our
society. They do this primarily by helping organizations function more
efficiently and solving complex operational challenges. As long as there are
human beings involved in the solving of managerial problems, there will be a
useful and proportionate place for management education. So rather than
bulldozing business schools, we should be taking a page out of their books by
learning how to replicate their best features and improving their worst.

*****

This article is [cross-posted on Medium](https://medium.com/@alexpmiller/what-good-are-business-schools-anyway-f5c399d916ef).
